>> Mathew DesLauriers: So yeah, so
I'm just gonna reset this to how it was
before I started tweaking this stuff.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So,
remember we had mesh basic material,
which is just choosing a random color,
and it's an unlet material.
So let's say we wanted to actually give
each of these cubes its own sort of
shader surface,
rather than just doing a single color.
So here's where we would replace mesh
basic material with shader material.
And three.js has these two different
types of shader materials.
It has one called ShaderMaterial, it has
another one called RawShaderMaterial.
And RawShaderMaterial is for more
advanced uses like if you really wanna
have full control over the shader,
and you don't want three.js doing
anything helpful or fancy,
then you can use raw ShaderMaterial.
But usually, I like to use ShaderMaterial,
three.js just makes a few things a little
bit easier, and so we can do that.
Another thing I'm gonna do is before
I get too far into this, I'm gonna
rerun this command with hard loading,
just cuz I think it's really cool,
and now when I say it's just gonna
be nicer and so, that's all.
So, to get started with this,
you have to first use ShaderMaterial and
then you specify fragmentShader.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And this is
a string that we have to pass, and so
we're gonna create the string
up here somewhere.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And
it'll just be ESC templates string.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And it's gonna
look like this, so again it's our shader.
You'll notice immediately
a couple of different things,
one of the things that different.
Is that we don't have to say precision
high P float at the very top of our file.
We don't have to do this precision thing,
that's because three.js inserts it for us.
And if we were using raw ShaderMaterial,
then we would have to specify our
own precision and stuff like that.
But if you just want the basic shader,
just use it like this, and
so here we have our shader code.
And let's just try making everything
red to start off, my like go to.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And if it all works
you should end up with this red mesh.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And now we can
actually do basically the same stuff we
were doing before around things
like creating cool colors and
creating different ramps of colors and
stuff like that.
One thing is sometimes in three.js,
I don't know actually how this is gonna
work, vUv might exist by default in
their shader or it might not, let's see.
So if I just use vUV.x,
it's gonna give me an error, and
this is where things get
a little bit more in depth.
Let's see,
>> Mathew DesLauriers: Varying vec2.
And it's most likely because
the default vertex shader of
three.js doesn't include this information.
And this is where we get into
a bit of a higher concept,
we have to actually write our
own vertex shader, as well.
And again, it's a string,
we just pass it into our shader material,
and our string is gonna look like this.
Void main, and in a vertex shader,
we're not putting the frag color,
we're outputting the GL position.
And just like frag colors in vec four,
it's talking about the xyz and
w position and,
it's actually the screen position.
Anyways, we just imagine
it as the position of
each vertex in our cubes
in all of our scene.
And the way it's gonna work is you
have to just kinda memorize this line.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So it's a long
line, and the reason we're memorizing it
like this, is because three.js gives
us a couple built in utilities
that don't exist if you're
using a raw ShaderMaterial.
But they do exist when you're using
just a regular shader material.
And what's happening is that we're
matrix math, whereas this is a matrix,
and this is a matrix,
and this is a vector.
And this is kinda why I didn't wanna
include this in today's lesson,
but it's a little bit more scary.
Because matrix math is something,
maybe, not everyone's familiar with.
But, what's happening is we have a matrix
that defines the way that the camera looks
so this projection matrix is gonna
either be perspective or orthographic.
Just for
reference just remember the difference,
this is perspective versus orthographic,
and
you can sort of wrap up this information
of whether its this way or this way.
You can wrap that up in a matrix,
in a set of numbers.
And this set of numbers is
kinda contained in there and
then model view matrix,
that's just saying that's
basically gonna position each
cube in the correct place.
And this last part is basically
just gonna position each vertex and
each cube in the correct place, and
remember how with a pixel shader
everything is running on
each pixel in the surface.
We're talking about that grid of pixels,
and
how each pixel shader
runs on its own pixel.
Well in the vertex shader,
every vertex runs its own vertex shader.
And so it's a similar concept
of running many, many times, and
when we talk about a vertex, a triangle
is made up of three vertices is plural.
And a cube would be made up of a lot of
vertices because it have one face which is
two triangles, and then another face and
then another face and then another face.
So there is a lot of vertices in a cube,
and this method,
this main method, for the vertex
shader has been called on each vertex.
So it's still, you're gonna get
an error if you look in the console.
And that's because it's varying
UV doesn't exist anywhere yet.
And we hae to pass it down from
the vertexShader to the fragmentShader.
And this is a bit of a mind
bender is the way the opengl
pipeline works is that
you specify vertices.
So you create a triangle, or you create
a cube, or you create a sphere and
that sphere is gonna be made
up of lots of these vertices.
And then you have a shader that
describes each of those vertices.
And then you'd pass down your
information from your vertexShader,
down through the pipeline,
to the fragmentShader.
And the fragmentShader will use
those things that you passed down,
it'll use those varying things.
So, uniform is something we
were setting from JavaScript
varying is something that's
set from the vertexShader.
And already we can see with this code
we have a custom shader on our mesh.
We can see that it's a bit like a gradient
ramp, like we were doing earlier.
The only difference is
that it's just red so
I can I can just do the same
code we were doing earlier.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: Just using
gradients, this is kinda cool actually
interesting, if I set the clear color to,
>> Mathew DesLauriers: White.
I mean, it's kind of a cool image
on itself, these gradient cues.
And this is kind of a nice part of
creative coding in generative art, is when
you just like tweaking things and you're
like, this is kinda cool, I like this.
So that's kind of nice,
and then with this code,
we already have everything we need to
manipulate either the pixels of the mesh,
or manipulate the actual
vertices of the mesh.
So let's say we wanted to manipulate
the vertices of the mesh,
which is quite an advanced topic but
we're gonna just do it anyways.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So
the way it would look is a bit like this,
we would first,
make sure we have position.
We just pull it out as a vec3 variable
here, just reference it from here.
And we're going to just
multiply it by some value
sine of time, and
we're gonna get an error.
And that's because time doesn't
exist in our shader anywhere.
Just like with our 2D code,
we need to specify a uniform for time,
because it's being set from JavaScript.
And uniforms are set from JavaScript,
varyings are set from vertex\Shaders.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So here we go,
first step is to define
it in the vertexShader.
And then the next task is to pass it
down from JavaScript, and this three.js,
the syntax is a little bit different,
you can tell it's vertexShader, and
fragmentShader.
Different syntax, same with the uniforms,
it's not passed down in the same
way that we're passing down
the uniforms in our other sketches.
But in this case,
you just have to say uniforms, time,
it's kind of a tedious syntax,
but this is how it looks.
You say uniforms, it's an object, and
within that object you
have other properties.
These properties have to be the same
name as the value you're putting into
the shader.
And then instead of just an actual number,
you have to wrap that number
in an object that has value.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And
I might have broken something.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: I did
break something, sort of,
because right now we're setting the time
to zero and we're not changing the time.
So this is where three.js
is a little different than this
shader utility I was using.
And the reason I had us all working with
the shader utility is just cuz the syntax
is really tight and really simple.
But when we actually go into three.js
you have to set the uniforms,
you have to define it in the shader.
And then you have to
update it on each frame,
so here we are in the render function.
Let's expose the time prop, and
let's go through all of our meshes.
So we have to use a foreloop or
a foreeach function, and
we have to actually get a value
that's our list of meshes.
So I'm just gonna create this array,
it's an empty array,
and I'm gonna push each
mesh into this array.
So meshes.pushmesh,
cuz I just wanna store a reference to
all of these mesh objects that I've
created, so that's all I'm doing.
And then down here, when we're rendering,
before each time we render,
we're gonna do meshes.forEach, and
we're gonna loop over all those meshes.
And we're gonna update each of the meshes
uniform time values to be the same as
the time it's coming from canvas sketch.
So it has to look like this
mesh.material.uniforms.time.value = time.
And make sure you have that value at
the end here, it's kind of important.
>> Speaker 2: Are they not all
sharing the same like shader program?
They all have their own-
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So
they're all sharing the same
exact code from the shader.
And the only way you're gonna produce
differences between different cubes
is by setting different uniform
variables or different values like that.
Yeah, so because each cube is it's
own mesh, we can give each cube
a different uniform, right, but
the actual code isn't changing.
The code itself is always this exact
string and it's just, if we introduce
another uniform which actually we
should do, let's introduce a color,
cuz in our original thing we had
each cube as a different color.
So a color is gonna be vec3,
and color being RGB, so
that's why we're using vec3.
I'm sorry, I'm messing up, this color
stuff should go in our pixelShader.
Not in our vertex here because pixel
shaders we to site things like color and
those kind of things.
And let's just remove this one here
cuz we all ready have it here,
and for
now we'll just do color times vUv.x.
You'll see everything is black and
that's because we're not passing
any color down through three.js.
So here inside of our uniforms,
we had a new uniform called color,
and three.js has this
nice color constructor.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: And so the color,
let's say we're gonna set it to be red,
you'll see all of them are gonna be red or
orange, all of them are gonna be orange.
And then this whole thing down here,
this color attribute,
is not even being used and it's actually
giving us an error in the console and
it's warning us about that.
And it's because when
you use shader material,
you don't just have a material
attribute called color anymore.
You have to actually wire up all
of your individual attributes,
whether it's color or anything like that.
So, here we're just gonna replace
orange with random.pick pallette.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: So now, we'll end
up With cubes with multiple colors and
gradients, and all of these cubes
their vertexShader is actually
changing the size by multiplying
something in the vertexShader.
Which is still kind of boring, and this is
where you can like start to really like
combine all the stuff we've talked about,
like let's say glslify.
You can just import that and
use it, if you wanted to introduce
noise into your shader, instead of just
using the functions that are built in.
So we can actually do like pragma glslify,
and
then noise =
require('glsl-noise/simplex/3d').
We're actually going to use
four dimensional noise, so, so
far we've used 2D and 3D and
we haven't used 4D yet.
And that's because instead of
using a grid position of uv or
grid position of 2D coordinates,
now we have xyz.
So we just have to use four dimensional
noise if we wanna use the xyz and
the time together.
So I mean if I was just to
do something like this,
noise that for
because it's a four dimensional noise.
This a position.xyz and then time,
and all of a sudden we're
gonna get some cool crazy stuff
going on in our screen here.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: We can even do
something like this where instead of just
adding the noise value the negative
one to one value we take normal and
this is the surface normal vector of
the cube that's coming from three.js.
And this is a bit more math stuff,
but it's not producing
a very nice image yet so
we can tweak something we could say,
>> Mathew DesLauriers: Fix this no.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: Anyways.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: This is getting
into like weird territory of weird images,
it could be kinda cool though.
You can start to like really play with
these values and create spiky monsters.
>> Mathew DesLauriers: But that's as you
can see, it's running really efficiently,
and it's because we're
using a vertexShader.
And so all of the points inside of
these cubes is moving around with
the shader here.